Blog: What is a growth engineer (#5806)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/blog/what-is-a-growth-engineer.md

---
title: What is a growth engineer (and how they help your startup)
date: 2023-04-19
author:
    - ian-vanagas
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full
category: Engineering
tags:
 - Explainers
---

Every startup loves to see signups, subscriptions, and revenue go up, yet all engineers basically work on things indirectly related to doing so. The power of growth engineers is that they focus on making these numbers go up, working on whatever it takes.

> A growth engineer is an engineer who works on projects impacting the core business metrics, no matter where they are in the product. This is different than regular engineers who work on specific products and features to improve metrics for them. This indirectly improves the core business metrics.

Reviewer: Would be good to disambiguate what "core business metrics" means. e.g. acquisition metrics, activation metrics, revenue?

Reviewer: maybe "growth metrics" is a better term and defining what that is?

Author: went with growth metrics for now.

> A growth engineer is an engineer who works on projects impacting the core business metrics, no matter where they are in the product. This is different than regular engineers who work on specific products and features to improve metrics for them. This indirectly improves the core business metrics.

Reviewer 2: "Growth engineering" roles can be _very_ top-of-funnel focused at some companies. Some growth engineers I've talked to don't even code and they are more part of the marketing team. Might be worth specifying that we're talking about growth engineering roles that put a heavy emphasis on the "engineering" part.

Author: Got it, I mentioned this in a few places now.

> Growth engineers help companies grow faster by focusing on projects with high potential to impact core business metrics. We know this because we have a team of growth engineers at PostHog, and they’ve made a big impact on signups and revenue. 

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if this belongs here but we have a very specific way of doing growth at PostHog that is different from what you might find at another company. Examples include:

- We don't take on special projects within the company's _products_, even if we think there is potential for this projects to grow revenue, etc.
  - This is because the product teams should be doing the innovation within their product areas, and they should know their customers best.
- We don't really focus on top-of-funnel at the moment - our marketing team is _very_ good at that
- We don't focus on activation for any particular product, but we (plan to!) help the product teams understand how to measure activation and give them the tools to improve it.
  - We are fully responsible for _global_ activation, which is specific to multi-product companies.

see: https://posthog.com/handbook/small-teams/growth

Author: Yeah I'm trying to strike a balance between what we do at PostHog, and what growth engineering means more generally. I'll work to make it clearer.

> To help you understand growth engineers better, this post will go over what we’ve learned about the type of people who succeed as growth engineers, what skills they have, what they work on, and why they matter.

Author: done

## What are the characteristics of a growth engineer?

To start to understand growth engineers, it is useful to understand who they are as people. When comparing them to regular engineers, here are the characteristics that stand out:

![Characteristics](../images/blog/what-is-a-growth-engineer/characteristics.png)

> 1. **Entrepreneurial**. Growth engineers have an interest in the business as a whole as well as the hustle to find ways to improve it. They find areas they can make a large impact on the core business metrics, and develop solutions themselves to improve those metrics. Like an entrepreneur, they are independent and scrappy.

Reviewer: Im not sure this is correct. I knew plenty of folks who worked on Growth but werent Entrepreneurial :) So I certainly wouldnt put it first.

Also, another point would be "user/product driven" i.e. need to be passionate about understanding and building great user experiences

2. **Experimental.** Growth ideas need testing in the real world, and this means growth engineers are like scientists: they experiment a lot. This means developing multiple solutions for a problem, having a testing framework, building their implementations, and evaluating its success. Growth engineers care more about real results from experiments than designing the perfect experiment. 

> 3. **Data-driven.** More so than other engineering roles, they care about usage data and it heavily informs how they work. They use data to inform and evaluate all the experiments they do. They need data, and the ability to analyze that data, to know which ideas to work on and how their proposed solutions are working.

Reviewer: this should probably be point 1.
It's the most important characteristic

![Growth engineers' power](../images/blog/what-is-a-growth-engineer/thanos.jpg)

If this sounds like a unicorn, you aren’t wrong. This is again why we find former technical founders as a good fit for this role. They have the business and product knowledge to develop growth ideas and strategies, the practical technical knowledge to implement them, as well as a familiarity with the data a product produces.  

## What do growth engineers actually work on?

So what do growth engineers use their skills to do? We’ve already covered that they work to increase signups, subscriptions, and revenue by working across the product, but what are some examples of what this looks like?

- Developing a growth strategy, experiment framework, and measurement for both.
- Doing SEO optimization on the marketing site. Building landing pages. Optimizing the signup funnels.
- Running A/B tests on specific parts of the signup and activation funnel. Trying to improve the conversion rate for both.
- Setting up in-app and push notification messaging systems. Building tools and systems for better product onboarding.

> 

Reviewer: In my experience they usually work on 2 different types of things:
1. Grow the target audience of the product / Working on a large projects that will unlock growth to a specific set of users that were unable to use the app before. A good example is Uber adding "pay with Cash" feature in India, since most people there dont use credit cards
2. Moving Activation/Acuqisition metrics. This usually involves large projects to help users understand and use the product better in their first few days (i.e. reach their "aha" moment sooner). It also involves tons of experiments, small and large, to try and move these metrics

Author: Got it added new markets and adjusted signup and activation bullet.

### What do PostHog’s growth engineers work on?

To give a specific example of what growth teams work on, we can look at our [growth team at PostHog](/handbook/small-teams/growth). Over the past few months, this team focused on three areas:

1. **Billing.** Creating a [billing service](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/11986) enabling different pricing for different plans and [products](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/15035/files). Improving the billing page both on the [website](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog.com/pull/5181) and [in-app](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/14652) to work with this service.
2. **Signup.** Improving the signup funnel. Running A/B tests of options like [single sign on buttons](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13234). [Verifying emails](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13632) and adding two-factor authentication.

> 3. **Onboarding.** Setting up [in-app messaging](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13108) and notifications. Set up customer.io. Add [autocapture](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/14687) and session recording toggles.

Reviewer: I really like that these to Pull Requests! makes it interesting to snoop around in

Billing is a major focus recently because we believe we can provide a better offering to users if we charge for separate products. This will lead to grow across the signup, usage, and revenue metrics the growth team cares about. This also means implementing this is on the growth team’s plate, and it’s a big task.

> ## Why do growth engineers matter?

Author: It's now changed and "Why you should hire a growth engineer"

Many businesses and engineering teams lose focus on the core metrics needed to grow. Growth engineering work across teams, products, and code base to keep this focus. In doing so, they can make a massive impact on those metrics.

There are many growth opportunities a standard engineering team doesn’t care about, but growth engineers do. This is because those engineering teams don’t set their goals as driving signups or activation. They focus on making the product better, which is necessary for growth engineers to exist. You can’t growth a non-existent product. 

There are optimizations to the signup and onboarding flow that don’t fall under the responsibility of any of our product teams. These are opportunities for the growth team. For example, making all the changes to billing to treat pricing as a product is a lot of work, but unlocks a lot of growth. If we didn’t have a growth team, we’d likely need a team dedicated to billing anyways. 

> ### What are the results of growth engineers at PostHog?

Reviewer: Maybe good to include examples of results/objectives/etc. from growth teams outside of PostHog?

---
title: What is a growth engineer (and how they help your startup)
date: 2023-04-20
author:
    - ian-vanagas
showTitle: true
rootpage: /blog
sidebar: Blog
hideAnchor: true
featuredImage: ../images/blog/posthog-engineering-blog.png
featuredImageType: full

> category: Engineering

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
category: Startups
```

Since we mention startups in the headline, I think it's the better category for this one.

tags:
 - Explainers
---

> Every startup loves to see its growth metrics like signups, subscriptions, and revenue go up, yet nearly all engineers work on things indirectly related to doing so. Growth engineers are different. They focus entirely on projects dedicated to driving as much growth as possible, no matter where they build those projects.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every startup loves to see its growth metrics – signups, subscriptions, and revenue, etc. – go up, yet most engineers work on things that don't directly impact those metrics. Growth engineers are different. They focus entirely on projects dedicated to driving as much growth as possible, no matter where they build those projects.
```

> The post goes over growth engineers, with a specific focus on our technical version role at PostHog. We cover the type of people who succeed as growth engineers, their skills, what they work on, and why you should hire them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this post, we'll explain the benefits of growth engineers, the type of people who succeed as growth engineers, their skills, what they work on, why you should hire them, and how growth engineering works at PostHog.
```

Reviewer 3: Suggestion: I think we should add a short boxout to the end of this intro that's basically "Who are we?". Would add some useful context about our perspective + a chance to share our values with the reader.

Author: Got it

## What are the characteristics of a growth engineer?

> To start, it is useful to understand who growth engineers are as people. When comparing them to regular engineers, here are the characteristics that stand out:

Reviewer: something reads strange to me about the phrase "regular engineers". Makes them sound somewhat inferior to growth engineers 😂

Author: Changed 😅

> To start, it is useful to understand who growth engineers are as people. When comparing them to regular engineers, here are the characteristics that stand out:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To start, it's useful to understand who growth engineers are as people. These are the characteristics we look for in growth engineers:
```

3. **Data-driven.** More than other engineering roles, they care about usage data and it guides their work. They use data to inform and evaluate all the experiments they do. They need data, and the ability to analyze that data, to know which ideas to work on and how their solutions are working.

4. **Curious.** Although it sounds a bit cliche, curiosity enables growth engineers to discover new opportunities, grasp new technologies, and figure out whatever they need to drive growth. They work with more tools and technologies than traditional engineers do. This means more learning, and being unafraid to dive into new subjects.

At PostHog, we find these characteristics often arise in former technical founders, and that means our growth team has always been entirely made up of them. Founders understand what it takes to build a product, have a combination of engineering and business skills, and are willing to figure out anything to drive growth.

## What skills does a growth engineer need?

Growth engineers are responsible for three key tasks:

1. Creating ideas and strategies for growth.
2. Implementing those ideas and strategies.
3. Measuring and evaluating those implementations.

> 

Reviewer: really nice summary. Very accurate IMO

To accomplish these tasks, they need a combination of engineering, business, product, design, and data skills.

### Engineering skills

Growth engineers write code to implement their ideas and experiments. If they couldn’t code, they wouldn’t be an engineer, and that is half the name. They must be comfortable across the stack, use new tools like external APIs, and work we unfamiliar tech if necessary.

> **Growth engineers vs growth hackers:** Growth hackers also aim to drive growth but focus on more non-product, non-technical solutions. Growth engineering, for some teams, might include this, but for us, the role focuses on technical work across products.

### Product and design knowledge

Second, the other part of creating and implementing ideas is **product and design knowledge**. Because a growth team works across the stack and teams, they are often "lone wolves." They need the ability to fend for themselves in product and design decisions. They don’t have to be Da Vinci, but this knowledge helps them create successful features.

> As [Porter](https://www.workatastartup.com/jobs/46166) says:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As [Porter](https://www.workatastartup.com/jobs/46166), a YC-backed devtool company founded in 2020, says:
```

> We're looking for a product engineer with strong design chops who is fluent in React/Typescript and CSS. Simply put, we want someone who will take Porter's usability and UX/visual polish to the next level. You will be involved in all feature discussions and will shape the trajectory of our product.

### Business understanding

Third, to create growth ideas based on solid strategies, growth engineers must have an **understanding of business**. This includes areas like marketing and finance. Without business knowledge, they can’t effectively make decisions about growth metrics related to those areas. They also need this knowledge to collaborate well with non-technical teams.

### Data literacy

Since growth engineers run many experiments, they must be able to craft hypotheses and evaluate results. They should know what factors are relevant, how to calculate significance, and what data to care about in the first place.

> As [Terra](https://www.workatastartup.com/jobs/59415) says:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As [Terra](https://www.workatastartup.com/jobs/59415), a YC- and Samsung-backed health API, says:
```

> > The ideal candidate will have a deep understanding of data analytics, website optimization, user acquisition, and user engagement strategies. You will be responsible for developing and executing strategies to grow web traffic and engagement with our target customers. This includes optimizing websites, analyzing user data, and making recommendations for changes to the product that will help us reach our goals.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The ideal candidate will have a deep understanding of data analytics, website optimization, user acquisition, and user engagement strategies. You will be responsible for developing and executing strategies to grow web traffic and engagement with our target customers... and making recommendations for changes to the product that will help us reach our goals.
```

Slight trim as it's a bit wordy

Author: Good call, I was thinking the same thing

If all this sounds like a unicorn, you aren’t wrong. This is again why we find former technical founders as a good fit for this role. They have the business and product knowledge to develop growth ideas and strategies, the practical technical knowledge to implement them, as well as a familiarity with the data a product produces.

> ![Growth engineers' power](../images/blog/what-is-a-growth-engineer/thanos.jpg)

Reviewer 3: This needs some padding to central align

Author: Added some transparency

> > **Growth engineers vs product engineers:** Both build new features, are opinionated, experiment, and take ownership. The difference is their focus. Product engineers focus on building products for specific users. Growth engineers focus on projects that drive growth. This could be a feature enabling product teams, a service supporting marketing, or an optimization to a cross-product flow. They are less constrained to a specific product.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> **Growth engineers vs product engineers:** Both build new features, are opinionated, experiment, and take ownership. The difference is their focus. [Product engineers](/blog/what-is-a-product-engineer) focus on building products for specific users. Growth engineers focus on projects that drive growth. This could be a feature enabling product teams, a service supporting marketing, or an optimization to a cross-product flow. They are less constrained to a specific product.
```

## What do growth engineers actually work on?

> So what do growth engineers use their skills to do? We already covered that they work to increase signups, subscriptions, and revenue by working across the product, but what are some examples of what this looks like?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So what do growth engineers apply their skills to? We already covered that they work to increase signups, subscriptions, and revenue by working across the product, but what does this look like?
```

- A pricing call to action change led to a 27% increase in clickthroughs.
- Focusing on the free plan on the pricing page led to a 14% increase in signups from that page.

### Onboarding

Onboarding is an area that is traditionally a big focus for growth teams, but isn't for us at the moment (it is a future priority).

Our team has set up [in-app messaging](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13108) and notifications, using customer.io.They have also added [autocapture](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/14687) and session recording toggles to the onboarding flow, increasing the visibility of these features.

## Why you should hire a growth engineer

Growth engineers help your overall business by helping all products grow faster. Growth metrics like signups and activation have downstream consequences on metrics other teams care about like feature usage and revenue.

We've seen this from our growth team. Building cross-product features, like billing, has improved our overall business and user experience. These features don't fit into a specific product team's responsibility and would be missed out on if growth engineers didn't exist.

> Growth engineers likely won't help you find traction, they need products to connect and optimize to thrive. Once you have traction, it might be the right time to hire a growth engineer to fuel rapid growth.

Reviewer: > Growth engineers likely won't help you find traction

This is certainly true, and in fact, growth engineers wont help you find product market fit AND you should only hire them once you have pmf

To accomplish these tasks, they need a combination of engineering, business, product, design, and data skills.

### Engineering skills

Growth engineers write code to implement their ideas and experiments. If they couldn’t code, they wouldn’t be an engineer, and that is half the name. They must be comfortable across the stack, use new tools like external APIs, and work we unfamiliar tech if necessary.

> **Growth engineers vs growth hackers:** Growth hackers also aim to drive growth but focus on more non-product, non-technical solutions. Growth engineering, for some teams, might include this, but for us, the role focuses on technical work across products.

### Product and design knowledge

Second, the other part of creating and implementing ideas is **product and design knowledge**. Because a growth team works across the stack and teams, they are often "lone wolves." They need the ability to fend for themselves in product and design decisions. They don’t have to be Da Vinci, but this knowledge helps them create successful features.

As [Porter](https://www.workatastartup.com/jobs/46166), a YC-backed devtool company founded in 2020, says:

> > We're looking for a product engineer with strong design chops who is fluent in React/Typescript and CSS. Simply put, we want someone who will take Porter's usability and UX/visual polish to the next level. You will be involved in all feature discussions and will shape the trajectory of our product.

Reviewer 4: It stood out for me that this said Product engineer rather than growth engineer

Author: Ahh, it's a growth/product engineer role 🤔

### Signup and activation

Our growth team are improving the signup funnel by running A/B tests of options like [single sign on buttons](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13234), [verifying emails](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13632), and adding two-factor authentication.

![Experiment example](../images/blog/what-is-a-growth-engineer/experiment.png)
<Caption>An example of the pricing call to action experiment.</Caption>

The results of this include:

- Asking for billing details earlier led to a 250% increase in card activations.
- A pricing call to action change led to a 27% increase in clickthroughs.
- Focusing on the free plan on the pricing page led to a 14% increase in signups from that page.

### Onboarding

Onboarding is an area that is traditionally a big focus for growth teams, but isn't for us at the moment (it is a future priority).

> Our team has set up [in-app messaging](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13108) and notifications, using customer.io.They have also added [autocapture](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/14687) and session recording toggles to the onboarding flow, increasing the visibility of these features.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our team has set up [in-app messaging](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/13108) and notifications, using customer.io. They have also added [autocapture](https://github.com/PostHog/posthog/pull/14687) and session recording toggles to the onboarding flow, increasing the visibility of these features.
```
